docs/kubernetes/basics/settingUpKubernetes.md, before:

# Kubernetes

Kubernetes is an open source system used to deploy, scale and manage containerised applications anywhere.

It is great for the following reasons:

1. It abstracts away infrastruture, as it handles compute/network/storage on behalf of your workloads.
2. It has built in service health monitoring, restarting containers if they are unhealthy or fail, making sure you have high availability.
3. It has built in commands to do a lot of heavy lifting that goes into application management, using `kubectl`.

## Components of Kubernetes

![Cluster diagram](../images/cluster_diagram.png)

## Cluster

This is what all your kubernetes parts run in.

## Namespaces

Namespaces conceptually compartmentalise your resources into virtual clusters, that way you can allocate a set amount of resources to each namespace. For example, if you create a namespace for each department in your company, you can limit the amount of CPU/RAM that namespace has to distribute amongst the components inside it.

Once you have a namespace, you can go ahead and add resources to it, such as variables using configMaps and secrets, or RAM/CPU set up from the resource part of the deployment manifest (the deployment.yaml).

### Creating a namespace

`kubectl create namespace <namespace name>`

### Get all namespaces

`kubectl get ns`

## ConfigMaps

ConfigMaps are objects used to store non-confidential variables as key : value pairs, pods can consume ConfigMaps as env variables/ comand line args or as config files in a volume. The advantage of ConfigMaps is that it allows you to decouple environment specific configurations from your application, making them easily portable and adjustable.

### Creating ConfigMaps from kubectl

`kubectl -n <namespace name> create configmap <configmap name> --from-literal ENV_VAR_NAME=value`

### list out configmaps:

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get cm`

### Output configmaps as yaml

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get cm <configmap name> -o yaml`

## Secrets

Secrets are similar to configMaps except they are encrypted at rest. It is important to keep secrets separate from configMaps as you can apply rbac to give access to secrets to some people but not others.

### Creating a secret from kubectl

```
kubectl -n <namespace name> create secret generic <secret name> \
--from-literal SECRET_KEY=secretValue \
--from-literal SECRET_KEY_2=secret_value_2
```

### Setting secrets in deployment

Once you have created the secret, you can then pass the secret to your deployment yaml manifest like so:

```
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: tpm-backend
          image: tpm-backend:0.0.2
          imagePullPolicy: Never
          ports:
          - containerPort: 80
          env:
          - name: SECRET_NAME_IN_CONTAINER
            valueFrom:
                secretKeyRef:
                    name: SECRET_NAME
                    key: SECRET_KEY
```

### List all secrets

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get secret`

## Deployments

We can use kubectl to apply our deployment manifest files. Deployment manifests are used to describe the specification of how we want to deploy our applications. e.g. what container, how much replicas we want, and the amount of resources we want to allocate to each deployment.

Example of deployment manifest yaml file:

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: myapp
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: myapp
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: myapp
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: mycontainer
        image: myimage:tag
        env:
        - name: ENV_VARIABLE_FROM_CONFIGMAP
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: myconfigmap
              key: configKey
        - name: ENV_VARIABLE_FROM_SECRET
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: mysecret
              key: secretKey
        ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
                protocol: TCP
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: "256Mi"
            cpu: "100m"
          limits:
            memory: "512Mi"
            cpu: "500m"
```

### Deploy yaml deployment manifest

`kubectl -n <namespace name> apply -f <deployment.yaml file>`

### View deployed pods

Get all pod names:

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get pods`

get specific pod:

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get pods/<pod name>`

## Services

Services are logical abstractions that provide stable endpoint to access our pods. Because pods are ephemeral, their IP addresses change when being spun up and down. Due to this, we cannot directly connect to them, as the connection will be unreliable, to counteract this issue, we use services, where we can use a stable IP address and port to point to specific pods via the app name defined in the service.

Pods running different applications can communicate with each other through services as long as each application is being exposed by a service.

Services are defined through a yaml manifest that can be applied.

Example of backend service:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: tpm-backend
spec:
  type: ClusterIP
  selector:
    app: tpm-backend
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 8080
      targetPort: 8080
```

In the example above `port` is the port on which the service itself listens for traffic, while `targetPort` is the port to which traffic is forwarded to the backend pods, hence the targetPort needs to be the same port that the application's deployment yaml is exposing.

By default, the type of service is `ClusterIP` if no other type is set, this is an internal IP address that provides an IP address for other components within the cluster to connect to, but does not allow connection from anything external.

### Apply service Yaml manifest

`kubectl -n <namespace name> -f <path to service yaml file>`

### list all services in namespace

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get svc`

running the above command will give us information for each service, including the clusterIP we can access our deployment on, as well as the port it exposes.

### Applications communicating through services internally

If you have two different deployments running different images and each deployment exposes a service, the pods managed by these deployments can communicate with each other using their internal Cluster IP addresses and exposed ports.

Here's how it works:

1.You have two Deployments, each deploying Pods running different container images.

2.Each Deployment exposes a Service, which creates a stable endpoint for accessing the Pods.

3.The Pods can communicate with each other using the DNS name of the Service, which resolves to the internal Cluster IP address of the Service. They can use the internal Cluster IP address and exposed ports to send and receive data.

Note that because services are logical abstractions, they can communicate across namespaces without any issues.

## Ingress

Ingress exposes HTTP and HTTPS routes from outside the cluster to services within the cluster. Traffic routing is controlled by rules defined on the Ingress resource. You can define an ingress API object through a yaml file.

In an ingress API object you define the host that you expect traffic to be incoming from, and can define where you want to route that traffic, by defining which service you want to send it to, by giving it the name and port of the service.

Example of ingress file:

```
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: tpm-backend-ingress
spec:
  rules:
    - host: "foo-bar.com" # //hostname for the application e.g. my website, need to map domain name to node IP address 4:45 on video
      http:
        paths:
          - pathType: Prefix
            path: "/tpm"
            backend:
              service:
                name: tpm-backend
                port:
                  number: 8080 # this points to the service port we are exposing
```

Defining and deploying an ingress resource is not enough, we need an ingress controller to actually run the ingress resource.

## Ingress Controllers

Ingress controllers are used to run your ingress resource you have deployed through a yaml configuration. Controllers are not defaultly installed in your cluster, so you must install one manually, there are multiple resources to choose from, but we will keep it simple and use nginx.

### deploy Nginx ingress controller through kubectl

The first thing is deploying your ingress controller to manage ingress as per your ingress manifest.

`kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/controller-v1.10.0/deploy/static/provider/cloud/deploy.yaml`

The command above will create an nginx controller within its own namespace `ingress-nginx`.
The ingress controller normally goes into its own namespace to make it easier to manage its resources and also separate its own resources so it has the capability to manage its own traffic.

Even though the ingress controller is in its own namespace, by default it listens out for all the ingress resources deployed in our cluster across all namespaces.

Once you have an ingress controller deployed, you can then route external network traffic to the ingress controller by routing traffic from your DNS to the ingress controllers `loadBalancer` IP address.

### Get LoadBalancer IP address of ingress controller.

This is the IP address you need to point external traffic to as an entry point to your cluster, i.e. you can set this IP address in the DNS settings of your cloudflare website.
To find this IP address you can run the following command:

`kubectl -n <ingress-controller-namespace> get svc`

Note that this external IP address will be `pending` in the kind cluster, this is because LoadBalancer services are designed to use the load-balancer infrastructure your cloud provider offers, and since we aren't running in the cloud, there is none.

This also means that when you apply your ingress manifest, there will be no address assigned, as the loadBalancer's external IP address will be the one assigned to your ingress.

Commit message:

new kubernetes info for cloudflare

docs/kubernetes/basics/settingUpKubernetes.md, after:

# Kubernetes

Kubernetes is an open source system used to deploy, scale and manage containerised applications anywhere.

It is great for the following reasons:

1. It abstracts away infrastruture, as it handles compute/network/storage on behalf of your workloads.
2. It has built in service health monitoring, restarting containers if they are unhealthy or fail, making sure you have high availability.
3. It has built in commands to do a lot of heavy lifting that goes into application management, using `kubectl`.

## Components of Kubernetes

![Cluster diagram](../images/cluster_diagram.png)

## Cluster

This is what all your kubernetes parts run in.

## Namespaces

Namespaces conceptually compartmentalise your resources into virtual clusters, that way you can allocate a set amount of resources to each namespace. For example, if you create a namespace for each department in your company, you can limit the amount of CPU/RAM that namespace has to distribute amongst the components inside it.

Once you have a namespace, you can go ahead and add resources to it, such as variables using configMaps and secrets, or RAM/CPU set up from the resource part of the deployment manifest (the deployment.yaml).

### Creating a namespace

`kubectl create namespace <namespace name>`

### Get all namespaces

`kubectl get ns`

## ConfigMaps

ConfigMaps are objects used to store non-confidential variables as key : value pairs, pods can consume ConfigMaps as env variables/ comand line args or as config files in a volume. The advantage of ConfigMaps is that it allows you to decouple environment specific configurations from your application, making them easily portable and adjustable.

### Creating ConfigMaps from kubectl

`kubectl -n <namespace name> create configmap <configmap name> --from-literal ENV_VAR_NAME=value`

### list out configmaps:

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get cm`

### Output configmaps as yaml

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get cm <configmap name> -o yaml`

## Secrets

Secrets are similar to configMaps except they are encrypted at rest. It is important to keep secrets separate from configMaps as you can apply rbac to give access to secrets to some people but not others.

### Creating a secret from kubectl

```
kubectl -n <namespace name> create secret generic <secret name> \
--from-literal SECRET_KEY=secretValue \
--from-literal SECRET_KEY_2=secret_value_2
```

### Setting secrets in deployment

Once you have created the secret, you can then pass the secret to your deployment yaml manifest like so:

```
    spec:
      containers:
        - name: tpm-backend
          image: tpm-backend:0.0.2
          imagePullPolicy: Never
          ports:
          - containerPort: 80
          env:
          - name: SECRET_NAME_IN_CONTAINER
            valueFrom:
                secretKeyRef:
                    name: SECRET_NAME
                    key: SECRET_KEY
```

### List all secrets

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get secret`

## Deployments

We can use kubectl to apply our deployment manifest files. Deployment manifests are used to describe the specification of how we want to deploy our applications. e.g. what container, how much replicas we want, and the amount of resources we want to allocate to each deployment.

Example of deployment manifest yaml file:

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: myapp
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: myapp
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: myapp
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: mycontainer
        image: myimage:tag
        env:
        - name: ENV_VARIABLE_FROM_CONFIGMAP
          valueFrom:
            configMapKeyRef:
              name: myconfigmap
              key: configKey
        - name: ENV_VARIABLE_FROM_SECRET
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: mysecret
              key: secretKey
        ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
                protocol: TCP
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: "256Mi"
            cpu: "100m"
          limits:
            memory: "512Mi"
            cpu: "500m"
```

### Deploy yaml deployment manifest

`kubectl -n <namespace name> apply -f <deployment.yaml file>`

### View deployed pods

Get all pod names:

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get pods`

get specific pod:

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get pods/<pod name>`

## Services

Services are logical abstractions that provide stable endpoint to access our pods. Because pods are ephemeral, their IP addresses change when being spun up and down. Due to this, we cannot directly connect to them, as the connection will be unreliable, to counteract this issue, we use services, where we can use a stable IP address and port to point to specific pods via the app name defined in the service.

Pods running different applications can communicate with each other through services as long as each application is being exposed by a service.

Services are defined through a yaml manifest that can be applied.

Example of backend service:

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: tpm-backend
spec:
  type: ClusterIP
  selector:
    app: tpm-backend
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 8080
      targetPort: 8080
```

In the example above `port` is the port on which the service itself listens for traffic, while `targetPort` is the port to which traffic is forwarded to the backend pods, hence the targetPort needs to be the same port that the application's deployment yaml is exposing.

By default, the type of service is `ClusterIP` if no other type is set, this is an internal IP address that provides an IP address for other components within the cluster to connect to, but does not allow connection from anything external.

### Apply service Yaml manifest

`kubectl -n <namespace name> -f <path to service yaml file>`

### list all services in namespace

`kubectl -n <namespace name> get svc`

running the above command will give us information for each service, including the clusterIP we can access our deployment on, as well as the port it exposes.

### Applications communicating through services internally

If you have two different deployments running different images and each deployment exposes a service, the pods managed by these deployments can communicate with each other using their internal Cluster IP addresses and exposed ports.

Here's how it works:

1.You have two Deployments, each deploying Pods running different container images.

2.Each Deployment exposes a Service, which creates a stable endpoint for accessing the Pods.

3.The Pods can communicate with each other using the DNS name of the Service, which resolves to the internal Cluster IP address of the Service. They can use the internal Cluster IP address and exposed ports to send and receive data.

Note that because services are logical abstractions, they can communicate across namespaces without any issues.

## Ingress

Ingress exposes HTTP and HTTPS routes from outside the cluster to services within the cluster. Traffic routing is controlled by rules defined on the Ingress resource. You can define an ingress API object through a yaml file.

In an ingress API object you define the host that you expect traffic to be incoming from, and can define where you want to route that traffic, by defining which service you want to send it to, by giving it the name and port of the service.

Example of ingress file:

```
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: tpm-backend-ingress
spec:
  rules:
    - host: "foo-bar.com" # //hostname for the application e.g. my website, need to map domain name to node IP address 4:45 on video
      http:
        paths:
          - pathType: Prefix
            path: "/tpm"
            backend:
              service:
                name: tpm-backend
                port:
                  number: 8080 # this points to the service port we are exposing
```

Defining and deploying an ingress resource is not enough, we need an ingress controller to actually run the ingress resource.

## Ingress Controllers

Ingress controllers are used to run your ingress resource you have deployed through a yaml configuration. Controllers are not defaultly installed in your cluster, so you must install one manually, there are multiple resources to choose from, but we will keep it simple and use nginx.

### deploy Nginx ingress controller through kubectl

The first thing is deploying your ingress controller to manage ingress as per your ingress manifest.

`kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/controller-v1.10.0/deploy/static/provider/cloud/deploy.yaml`

The command above will create an nginx controller within its own namespace `ingress-nginx`.
The ingress controller normally goes into its own namespace to make it easier to manage its resources and also separate its own resources so it has the capability to manage its own traffic.

Even though the ingress controller is in its own namespace, by default it listens out for all the ingress resources deployed in our cluster across all namespaces.

Once you have an ingress controller deployed, you can then route external network traffic to the ingress controller by routing traffic from your DNS to the ingress controllers `loadBalancer` IP address.

### Get LoadBalancer IP address of ingress controller.

This is the IP address you need to point external traffic to as an entry point to your cluster, i.e. you can set this IP address in the DNS settings of your cloudflare website.
To find this IP address you can run the following command:

`kubectl -n <ingress-controller-namespace> get svc`

Note that this external IP address will be `pending` in the kind cluster, this is because LoadBalancer services are designed to use the load-balancer infrastructure your cloud provider offers, and since we aren't running in the cloud, there is none.

This also means that when you apply your ingress manifest, there will be no address assigned, as the loadBalancer's external IP address will be the one assigned to your ingress. Once you have an ingress controller running that exposes a public IP address, you use that IP address to route traffic, e.g. point the DNS record to the ingress controller's IP address when creating a DNS record on cloudflare.
